Joshua Morony
The easier way to code Angular apps
Jan 11, 2023  Reactive/Declarative Programming
Ever hear about "declarative" coding or "reactive" coding? These are concepts I struggled to properly understand and appreciate for a long time. This video aims to give a brief explanation that gets right to the heart of what this is all about and why it is beneficial.

Get weekly content and tips exclusive to my newsletter: 
https://mobirony.ck.page/4a331b9076 

Learn Angular with Ionic: https://ionicstart.com

0:00 Introduction
1:38 What is declarative?
3:57 Why observables?
4:24 This is still imperative
6:06 Declarative version
7:54 The benefit
8:23 Imperative is not bad

#ionic #angular

- More tutorials: https://eliteionic.com
- Follow me on Twitter: https://twitter.com/joshuamorony

Transcript
Introduction
from the time I learned angular up until
a year or two ago I like most other
angular developers coded imperatively I
kept hearing about coding 
declaratively
and coding 
reactively 
but it took me a
long time to get a solid grasp on what
that actually means when I did start to
understand it though the quality of my
code and my enjoyment in writing it
increased dramatically the concepts
seemed much more natural and intuitive
now and coding imperatively by
comparison actually feels painful now
but getting to that point was not easy
so in this video I am aiming to give you
the brief and simple explanation of
declarative
 code and its relationship to
reactive
 coding that I feel like I
needed right at the beginning so when
you first start looking into this stuff
you will likely come across the
explanation that when we code
imperatively 
we are saying how we want
to do something whereas when we code

declaratively 
we are saying 
what we want
or 
what something is 

the classic example
given is that imperative code often
looks like this where we have an
explicit set of instructions that are
followed to achieve something in a way
that is very computer-like the example
you often see for 
declarative code is
that of an 
SQL statement like this so
this doesn't say how to get the data
from the database it just describes what
we want on a more human level so this is
all true enough but it's also super
vague and high level my problem was how
do I take this declarative concept and
apply it to my angular code and what do
observables and 
not subscribing to them
have to do with all of this 


What is declarative?
so let's
jump into some code and take a look at
an overly simplistic example to get
right to the heart of what coding
declaratively 
in angular means so I have
this class member called 
itemsLeftInStock
 and I assign It Whatever value is
returned by this method so is this
declarative or is it imperative so to
some degree what is more or less
declarative is up to interpretation but
a key thing to consider in whether
something like this is declarative is
whether we can look at this declaration
and understand what items left in stock
is without having to look at other parts
of this component for additional context
so I can look at this one line and see
the items left in stock is just whatever
is returned by this method so that seems
pretty declarative right 
the problem
here is that there is no guarantee this
value won't be changed somewhere else in
the code 
for example presumably if some
item is purchased the itemsLeftInStock will change so 
maybe we do
something like this now 
we no longer
have the full picture of what items left
in stock is just by looking at this
declaration we have to search through
this code to see where it is referenced
and see how we are changing that value
so not only does this make it a little
bit harder to understand what items left
in stock is it also relies on us
manually remembering to update this
value whenever the stock level changes
so it seems like this value is supposed
to be the current items left in stock
but if we buy something and forget to
update this value then it no longer
accurately reflects the 
itemsLeftInStock
 which is why with this imperative
style code it becomes important for us
to take in the broader context of this
entire component to understand what this
is we can't just trust that it will live
up to its name of items left in stock so
one way I could force this to be
declarative 
is to do something like this
so by adding the 
readonly 
keyword 

I now
know that items left in stock can't
change and so I do have the full context
of what this is just by looking at this
single line here but this doesn't really
work because we do need to change this
value and now our buy item method isn't
going to work 


Why observables?
so this is where the
concept of rxjs and observables and
specifically 
not subscribing to them
manually comes into play so the
observable is what allows us to
declaratively code what something is but
it still allows the value of that
something to change over time so rather
than dealing directly with the values we
deal with the method of observation that
controls how that value changes over
time 
so let's expand this example a bit
This is still imperative
and try to use an observable to make our
code more declarative and the initial
version we create is still actually
going to be imperative 
this is an
important aspect to understand because
just using an observable doesn't make
your code declarative so a key
difference now is that rather than
manually updating the stock level within
this component 

we have this observable
stream
that will emit the new values for us so
this is useful but this particular
implementation has some flaws and we've
also introduced a new requirement here
so we are going to utilize this in the
template to 
enable or disable a button
based on whether there is stock
available so this 
canPurchase
 flag is
based on the items left in stock 
but the
problem we have is that this value is
sort of trapped inside of the observable
Stream 
So to determine how to set can
purchase we need to get it out by
subscribing to it and then we are
imperatively setting both of those
values like this and since we have added
this manual subscription that also means
we need some kind of strategy for
unsubscribing which is why we also have
this destroy Notifier that will emit
when the 
ngOnDestroy
lifecycle Hook is
triggered and this observable will
automatically unsubscribe when that
destroy observable emits so we are used
using observables here 
but this is still
very much imperative 

I definitely cannot
just look at these declarations here to
understand what items left in stock and
canPurchase are because they aren't
even defined at this point I need to
check what is happening in the rest of
the code to understand how those values
are changed 


Declarative version
so to make this code more
declarative we could change it to this
instead 
so now rather than manually
subscribing to observable streams to get
their values out 
we are using rxjs
operators like the 

map

here to
declaratively Define how the values
should be computed 
instead of working
directly with the values themselves 
we
are now just working with streams items
left in stock is just this stream
returned from our items service and
there is nothing else in this component
that we need to know about and this can
purchase stream is derived from the
items left in stockstream but again
everything we need to know about it is
contained right here 
we don't need to
search through the rest of the code to
understand what 
canPurchase
 is so our
canPurchase
 stream takes values from
the items left in stockstream and then
modifies it to either be true or false
depending on whether the itemsLeftInStock value is above zero or not 
so this
declaration here does reference code
somewhere else in the component it's
referencing the other stream here 
but it
is very clearly pointing to the
dependency that it has on it we don't
need to search through this code for
every place where 
canPurchase
 is
mentioned because its entire definition
including what it depends on is
contained right here 
we're not going to
run into a situation where some code
buried further down in this component is
going to change this in some surprising
way 
we know exactly what it does up
front so this is 
declarative 
we now also
don't need to worry about handling the
subscription manually as we are just
able to pass this stream into the
template And subscribe to it with the
async pipe 
and that is going to handle
unsubscribing from the stream
automatically for us 


The benefit
so the benefit of
this effect only compounds when we have
more and more state that depends on each
other whenever one thing Upstream
changes everything Downstream from that
automatically updates and that is what
is meant by 
reactivity
 or 
reactive
coding 

something changes and then things
react to it so this code doesn't rely on
us remembering to manually update things
so not only is this code shorter and
easier to understand it is also much
less prone to bugs 


Imperative is not bad
so one final
important thing to keep in mind is that
imperative code is not inherently bad

declarative code is just an abstraction
on top of imperative code 
it's higher
level code that can make coding easier
and less error prone but at some point
beneath the surface imperative code is
still required and if you are working at
lower levels and imperative code will
absolute really be required 
this SQL
statement does not just magically work
somewhere it needs imperative code
beneath the surface to actually retrieve
those records from a database 
but at the
level of building applications I'm a
strong advocate for declarative and
reactive code as a way to improve the
quality of your code and your sanity in
building and maintaining it so there is
more to know about declarative code even
in the context of angular specifically
but I think what we have covered in this
video gets to the heart of what it is
all about 
so if you found this video
useful please consider leaving a like or
subscribe before you go and if you are
interested in learning a lot more about
this style of coding in angular feel
free to check out my 
ionixtart.com

course in the description where we build
mobile applications with angular using
the ionic UI framework



121 Comments
Patrick Chasco
Patrick Chasco
4 months ago
Observables and RxJS operators are a game changer. 

That being said, RxJS is also a powerful foot-gun and it is easy to get yourself into a situation where your declarative pipes are every bit as convoluted and even harder to debug than straightforward imperative code. This is especially true when combining observables.
27
Jason Rooney
Jason Rooney
4 months ago
I think the key reason you should work declaratively as much as possible is that your main goal with any component should be to minimize state as much as possible. That means as few writable or mutable public properties as humanly possible within your component. This holds true for any component based web framework.
10
LowrollerWTF
LowrollerWTF
4 months ago (edited)
I found this video incredibly useful. 6 months after switching to Angular from React I am not declarative 100% but I end up always subscribe to observablels as a part of my brain still tells me that I need to "own" those state values by storing them in variables. The example you are showing here is a lot smoother and shows me I still have along way to go and adjust to this mindset. I would like to become a pro member on your platform but for the moment I am not interested in Ionic but purely on Angular. I was wondering if you have more courses going to be added on that..! Not judging, I think that what you are doing is great is just that I am not into mobile apps rn
32
Joshua Morony
路
Joshua Morony
Joshua Morony
4 months ago
I am planning to do an "Angular only" flavour of Ionic Start soon, but Ionic Start already is mostly just an Angular course where you are using Ionic UI components instead of something like Material Design components
9
Wolf ElectronicS
Wolf ElectronicS
4 months ago
It's sort of interesting to me reading that you switched from React to Angular. These days I normally hear the opposite. 
I'm glad about that, since I've always preferred Angular over React.
1
LowrollerWTF
LowrollerWTF
4 months ago (edited)
 @Wolf ElectronicS  well I ended up leading a team which is experienced in Angular and forcing them to switch to React would've taken too long... However I ended up enjoying the built in tools Angular comes with but there are some things like forms which ended up being way too complicated for what it needs to do really. Also having a route-aware menu in React is as simple as using a hook while in Angular you might end up subscribing to the router events, finding the Navigation end... I mean this is way more verbose than it should be and IMO Angular has some work to do in smoothing some rough edges but so far it has proven to be more reliable than Next JS which would randomly require me to edit bits and pieces of the framework I don't feel I should've touched
1
abstract object
abstract object
4 months ago
What Id be interested in seeing is the proper use of RxJS across React/Vue and of course Angular.
12
BGivo
BGivo
1 month ago
You are so great at explaining challenging topics and have really improved your presentation style. When I first saw your videos I was a bit overwhelmed by your focus on ionic, but even then you still had really good Angular content. I see you've recently done a lot more Angular and the quality of your videos is even better now so really excited to see more videos from you. I think you will reach 1 million subscribers. You are special.
L瓢啤ng Tr岷n
L瓢啤ng Tr岷n
4 months ago
Recently, I'm just get into learning how to code reactively and I found your videos super useful. Thank you for all your videos and hope that there will be more about this topic
3
Bruno Miguel
Bruno Miguel
2 months ago
I have been down this road myself. One thing I would like to add is that part of the power of this library comes in the form of functional programing. Although the Observer pattern is more flashy because makes it "reactive" it is only one part of the equation the other is in reality functional programming with all the great things it has like pure functions and thus avoiding side effects and of curse like you mention a few times :) makes the code declarative rather than imperative. The declarative part comes from functinal programming and not from Observer pattern.
Mykola Kozachenko
Mykola Kozachenko
3 months ago
Very nicely explained. The key idea is that a simple variable represents a single value, but a stream represents all of the values at once
Ostap1974
Ostap1974
2 months ago
Would be interesting to see your view on the corresponding ItemsService implementation, like receiving list of items from server, adding/removing some, sorting etc.
Dlazzy
4 months ago
Really nice video!
Is it possible to get source code for this? Or at least the service code to handle items stock? Thank you!!
3
Martin Krutzfeld
4 months ago
Nice. Never heard about the concept, but always intuitively aimed for that.

The data flow must be crystal clear in Angular.
1
Disable Blue
2 months ago
This video is probably the best to explain declarative. I was struggling to explain declarative to new people  
B J
3 months ago
I think for me the distinction between when code is either imperative or declarative comes down to the degree to which a consumer of a resource needs to manage the state of that resource in order to address its concerns. So the higher the degree of management of the resources state by the consumer, the greater the degree of the imperative nature of the code and vice versa.
Rudolf Mayer
4 months ago
You are probably the sole reason I actually started transitioning to a much more RxJS-accompanied coding and now get frustrated and confused when I see my colleagues' imperative code like * omg Ctrl+F variable name here I come again *
8
David O'Riley
4 months ago
I like the idea of declarative coding with Rxjs observables. What I'm not crazy over is the possibility of having a bunch of unnecessary *ngIf's in the template just so I can use the async pipe and use the value elsewhere. The ngIf's has some overhead and interferes with rendering, and in the case of falsy values it just wouldn't show the element all of which could lead to some edge cases in prod. Do you know of an effective alternative to the *ngIf + async pipe pattern that avoids this in some way? I am aware of packages like RxAngular and NgRx that have structural let directives which can be used as an alternative. Are those something you've used or would try for a better declarative experience?
4
路
Frank Seidel
4 months ago
Great video Josh. What is your approach regarding ion-refresher and the async pipe? Am I right to assume that as long as ion-refresher itself isn't reactive (throws event ionRefresh, no observable to subscribe to) I have to stick to manually subscribe / unsubscribe in the template's code? Because somehwere you have to do the "this.refresher.complete()"
At least if you don't want to overcomplicate things.
Giorgi Merabishvili
4 months ago
Great video as always. One general question: What are your thoughts regarding Angular for the next few years?   Will it be relevant and popular among Devs and companies or will it lose with React ultimatey?
2
路
The Answer
4 months ago
I want more videos like this for common and more complex use cases
1
路
Iago Campos
4 months ago
Every time I watch your videos I learn something new. Thanks for the awesome content!
1
V V
2 months ago
I love the way how you explain things, it is pretty close to me, I can't stop watching 

